In the last lectures, you learned how to use canActivate to control access to a route,
now I want to focus on the control of whether you are allowed to leave a route or not.
We can control this too and we might want to control this if we are logged in
once we do edit a server. Now we for example are allowed to edit the dev server
and here, if we actually changed something, I want to ask the user if he accidentally clicks back or somewhere
else,
if you really want to leave or if you maybe forgot to click update server first,
so this convenience method of keeping the user from accidentally navigating away.
How can we implement this?
Let's go to the edit-server.component for this, here and let's add a new property.
Below allowEdit,
I'll add a changesSaved property which is false by default and which I want to change whenever we
click on update server.
Here of course, we did update the server,
so I want to call changesSaved and set this to true here because now, the changes were indeed saved.
After the changes were saved here,
I want to navigate away. So I will inject the router here, of type router,
make sure to add the import at the top as always from the @angular/router package and then here after we
saved our changes,
I want to navigate away, I want to go up one level to the last loaded server and for this, I will pass the
relativeTo configuration and want to navigate relative to the currently active route.
So far so good, we're changing this changesSaved property here.
Now let's make sure that whenever the user tries to accidentally navigate away, that we prevent him
from doing so or at least ask if he really wants to leave. Now we somehow need to execute this code in
this component here because we will need access to this changesSaved method which informs us on whether
this update button was clicked or not.
However a guard always needs to be a service because we need to provide it just like we provided the
auth guard.
So somehow this doesn't fit,
we need to access the code in our component and have a service and that sounds like a complicated set
up but it isn't, it's actually really simple.
In my edit-server folder here, I'll add a new file, I'll name it can-deactivate-guard
and this again will also be a service as all guards are and in here, I
first of all now want to export an interface, an interface simply is a contract which can be imported by
some other class let's say which forces this class to provide some logic.
So here, I will name this CanComponentDeactivate and this interface will require one thing from the
component which implements it,
this component should have a canDeactivate
method. This method and this is simply how I define the type of this canDeactivate
method since this is only an interface, it won't contain the actual logic,
it will only contain information how it should look like.
So this method should take no arguments but in the end, it should return an observable which therefore
needs to be imported in this file here, from rxjs/Observable which will resolve to a boolean in the end
or a promise which will resolve to a boolean in the end or just a boolean.
You might recognize this pattern here from the can-activate-guard,
these guards share the same structure.
So that is my interface,
nice to have it but that alone won't do the trick.
Now let's come to the important thing,
the meat of this class, of the service here I should say, the service itself.
So I'll name it CanDeactivateGuard and this guard will implement
CanDeactivate, this is an interface provided by the Angular router, so we need to import it from there.
This actually is a generic type and it will wrap our own interface, so it will wrap an interface which
forces some component or some class to implement the canDeactivate method. Might sound complicated but
this is the set up which will make sure that we later can easily connect a component to our
CanDeactivateGuard here.
So for now, let's just go with that piece of information
and now this class here, this guard will also need to have a canDeactivate method.
This is the canDeactivate method which will be called by the Angular router
once we try to leave a route. Therefore this will have the component on which we're currently on as an
argument and this component needs to be of type CanComponentDeactivate, which means it needs to be
a component which has this interface here implemented,
therefore a component which has a canDeactivate method,
this will become super important in a second.
We also will receive the current route as an argument, so that is an activated route snapshot,
need to make sure to import this too. It will have the current state,
so that's a router state snapshot,
import this too and the next state,
so where do you want to go,
because remember, this will be called at the end when we want to leave a route. So next state is an optional
argument though,
this will also be a router state snapshot and this will now also return an observable, a promise or
a boolean,
so just like the CanActivateGuard. That is how the canDeactivate method in our CanDeactivateGuard looks
like
and here I now want to call canDeactivate on the component we're currently on
and this is why I need to implement this interface in this component,
why I created this interface in the first place because now, the Angular router can execute canDeactivate
in our service and can rely on the fact that the component we're currently on has the canDeactivate
method too because this is what we will actually implement the logic checking whether we are allowed to
leave or not because we need this connection between our guard and the component.
So this is why we can safely call canDeactivate here and now with that information,
we can go back to our app routing module and on the edit page here, we want to add this guard.
So we can add canDeactivate as a property to this route config,
it takes an array just like canActivate
and here, we now will point to our CanDeactivateGuard.
Make sure to add this import therefore and now Angular will run this guard
whenever we try to leave this path here, this component loaded at this path. For this to work,
we of course need to go to our module and provide our CanDeactivateGuard, just like before,
canDeactivate.
With this provided, make sure to add the import,
we're almost there but one important piece is missing.
Remember that I told you that the CanDeactivateGuard will in the end call canDeactivate, our component.
Well, for this to work on our edit-server.component, here we need to implement our CanComponentDeactivate
interface, our own interface
we exported in our can-deactivate-guard.service file,
this interface. This interface now forces us to implement the canDeactivate method in our component
which is important because we tried to call this method on our component here. So in the edit-server.component
here, I will simply add a canDeactivate method
now. We know how this method should look like because we defined it here,
it should return an observable, a promise or a boolean,
so let's make sure that it does
and now here, first of all we need to import observable from rxjs/Observable
but with that added, with this import added, here in canDeactivate, we now provide the actual logic deciding
on whether we are allowed to leave or not.
This logic will be run whenever the CanDeactivateGuard is checked by the Angular router.
So here I would quickly check if we're first of all allowed to edit this because if we're not allowed
like this, here I will return true anyways because here we weren't allowed to edit it in the first place
so sure you may leave
and otherwise, I will check if my server name here is unlike the server name we had at the beginning.
Server name here, this property is simply bound via two-way binding to user inputs,
so initially this sets to the value we get from outside, from the server which was loaded, we bind it here
but as soon as we type, we will have some differences.
So if we have differences on the server name or on the server status,
so here I also check if this is not the same as before, server status.
So if one of the two was changed and now I'll wrap it in parentheses, so if one of the two was changed
and the changes were not saved,
so changesSaved is false,
in this case.
I want to return a confirm dialog where I ask the user, do you want to discard the changes? Otherwise
I will return true because otherwise either nothing was changed or it was changed
but changesSaved is set to true, so we did save it
indeed. With this in place, let's go back, let's go back to our servers
and first of all login maybe.
Let's go to the dev server which is the one we are allowed to edit
and here,
if I now type something there and I didn't click update server and I click somewhere else,
we are asked if we want to leave
and if I click cancel, we stay on this page.
We may now save our changes
and then we are navigated away without getting any issues at all
and the fact that we updated the wrong server simply happens because here, we still are always loading
the server with the ID one,
so we should update this to get our real ID.
So maybe here, access our route snapshot params ID and pass this as an ID and thereafter of course
also subscribe to route parents to update the ID if params change, that is something you can do as
an exercise
and of course make this of type number by converting it
but more importantly here, everything's working as it should,
we are only allowed to change this if we did click update, otherwise we are asked
or of course if here once we are asked, we click OK, we are allowed to discard our changes,
so that is true or that is possible too
but now with canDeactivate, we have this extra protection in place.
So with this, we learned a lot about routing in this module,
now there's one more guard I want to dive into and we will do so in the next lecture.